### Introduction

Precision oncology, or the selection of cancer treatments based on molecular or cellular features of patients' tumors, has become a fundamental part of the standard of care for some cancers [@doi:10.1093/annonc/mdx707].
Although each tumor is unique, the successes of precision oncology reinforce the idea that there are commonalities that can be understood and therapeutically targeted.
Targeted therapies that have been successfully applied across cancer types and patient subsets include _HER2_ (_ERBB2_) inhibitors in breast and stomach cancer [@doi:10.1093/jnci/djp341], BTK inhibitors in various hematological malignancies [@doi:10.1186/s13045-022-01353-w], and _EGFR_ inhibitors across a variety of carcinomas [@doi:10.1186/s13045-022-01311-6].
The genes and mutations that drive cancer are often specific to a given cancer type or subtype, but they tend to converge on a few pathways [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.03.035; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.045], making more general targeted treatments possible.

The past decade has seen an expansion in the size and diversity of cancer genomics datasets, both publicly available and otherwise.
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Pan-Cancer Atlas [@pancanatlas] is a large, public human tumor sample dataset, containing >10,000 samples from 33 different cancer types, each profiled for varying -omics types with associated clinical information.
There are also public datasets containing model system data, including the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) containing -omics data from human-derived cancer cell lines [@doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1186-3], and the Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC) dataset containing drug sensitivity data for thousands of the same cell lines across hundreds of drugs [@doi:10.1093/nar/gks1111].
These datasets exhibit heterogeneity on multiple levels.
Overall, they vary in size, with TCGA having about an order of magnitude more tumor samples than the number of cell lines in CCLE.
Going a level deeper, the cancer types within them vary in size as well: TCGA has 1,218 breast cancer samples with gene expression data, but only 265 soft tissue sarcoma samples, and only 45 cholangiocarcinoma samples.

In modern machine learning research using text and images, there is a trend toward bigger models capable of solving broader arrays of tasks.
Foundation models, trained on large datasets to generalize to new tasks with no or minimal task-specific fine-tuning, are in many cases competitive with task-specific models [@arxiv:2205.09911], although they are not without unique caveats [@arxiv:2108.07258].
Similarly, in genomics, early examples of foundation models are beginning to appear [@arxiv:2306.15794; @doi:10.1101/2023.04.30.538439; @doi:10.1101/2023.05.29.542705].
Training foundation models on pan-cancer, pan-omics data would be a natural extension of these ideas, which could improve power to detect correlations between biomarkers and phenotypes of interest, or to identify drug susceptibilities in patient sub-populations.

As a whole, this dissertation explores ways in which the structure of large, public pan-cancer datasets can present unexpected challenges and caveats for machine learning.
TCGA and CCLE both contain data from various -omics types (feature groups) and samples from diverse cancer types/tissues of origin (sample groups).
There are additional, less obvious forms of structure in these data such as patient sub-populations and sample collection locations, which we will not address directly in this dissertation but which can affect model training and performance as well.
This chapter, Chapter 1, describes existing work at the intersection of cancer -omics and machine learning, which will provide context for the following chapters.
In particular, we focus in turn on applications of ML to cancer -omics data (first section of Chapter 1), and on ML methods that are currently used to take into account structure in -omics data (second section of Chapter 1).

