### Introduction

Gene expression profiles are widely used to classify samples or patients into relevant groups or categories, both preclinically [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009926; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa150] and clinically [@doi:10.1200/JCO.2008.18.1370; @doi:10/bp4rtw].
To extract informative gene features and to perform classification, a diverse array of algorithms exist, and different algorithms perform well across varying datasets and tasks [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009926].
Even within a given model class, multiple optimization methods can often be applied to find well-performing model parameters or to optimize a model's loss function.
One commonly used example is logistic regression.
The widely used scikit-learn Python package for machine learning [@url:https://jmlr.org/papers/v12/pedregosa11a.html] provides two modules for fitting logistic regression classifiers: `LogisticRegression`, which uses the `liblinear` coordinate descent method [@url:https://www.jmlr.org/papers/v9/fan08a.html] to find parameters that optimize the logistic loss function, and `SGDClassifier`, which uses stochastic gradient descent [@online-learning] to optimize the same loss function.

Using scikit-learn, we compared the `liblinear` (coordinate descent) and SGD optimization techniques for two prediction problems using two cancer transcriptomics datasets.
We first considered prediction of driver mutation status in tumor samples, across a wide variety of genes implicated in cancer initiation and development [@doi:10.1126/science.1235122].
We additionally predicted gene essentiality (dependency) from gene expression in cancer cell lines, across several genes playing different roles in cancer.
We applied LASSO (L1-regularized) logistic regression, and tuned the strength of the regularization to compare model selection between optimizers.
We found that across a variety of models (i.e. varying regularization strengths), the training dynamics of the optimizers were considerably different: models fit using `liblinear` tended to perform best at fairly high regularization strengths (100-1000 nonzero features in the model) and overfit easily with low regularization strengths.
On the other hand, after tuning the learning rate, models fit using SGD tended to perform well across both higher and lower regularization strengths, and overfitting was less common.

Our results caution against viewing optimizer choice as a "black box" component of machine learning modeling.
The observation that LASSO logistic regression models fit using SGD tended to perform well for low levels of regularization, across diverse driver genes, runs counter to conventional wisdom in machine learning for high-dimensional data which generally states that explicit regularization and/or feature selection is necessary.
Comparing optimizers or model implementations directly is rare in applications of machine learning for genomics, and our work shows that this choice can affect generalization and interpretation properties of the model significantly.
Based on our results, we recommend considering the appropriate optimization approach carefully based on the goals of each individual analysis.

