### Results

#### `liblinear` and SGD LASSO models perform comparably, but `liblinear` is sensitive to regularization strength

For each of 84 driver genes from the Vogelstein et al. 2013 paper, we trained models to predict mutation status (presence or absence) from RNA-seq data, derived from the TCGA Pan-Cancer Atlas.
Gene expression signatures that distinguish mutated from wild-type samples have been previously validated in multiple cancer driver genes and pathways of interest [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.03.046; @doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.03.076; @doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0241514] and benchmarked broadly across genes and data types [@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02021-3; @doi:10.1186/s13059-022-02705-y], and the resulting signatures or classifiers can be used to identify patients with atypical alterations or susceptibilities to targeted therapy [@doi:10.1142/9789811215636_0031; @doi:10.1038/s41525-022-00328-7; @doi:10.1101/2022.07.28.501874].
For each optimizer, we trained LASSO logistic regression models across a variety of regularization parameters (see Methods for parameter range details), achieving a variety of different levels of model sparsity (Supplementary Figure {@fig:compare_sparsity}).
We repeated model fitting/evaluation across 4 cross-validation splits x 2 replicates (random seeds) for a total of 8 different models per parameter.
Cross-validation splits were stratified by cancer type.

Previous work has shown that pan-cancer classifiers of Ras mutation status are accurate and biologically informative [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.03.046].
We first evaluated models for KRAS mutation prediction.
As model complexity increases (more nonzero coefficients) for the `liblinear` optimizer, we observed that performance increases then decreases, corresponding to overfitting for high model complexities/numbers of nonzero coefficients (Figure {@fig:optimizer_compare_mutations}A).
On the other hand, for the SGD optimizer, we observed consistent performance as model complexity increases, with models having no nonzero coefficients performing comparably to the best (Figure {@fig:optimizer_compare_mutations}B).
In this case, top performance for SGD (a regularization parameter of 3.16 x 10^-3^) is slightly better than top performance for `liblinear` (a regularization parameter of 1 / 3.16 x 10^2^): we observed a mean test AUPR of 0.725 for SGD vs. mean AUPR of 0.685 for `liblinear`.

To determine how relative performance trends with `liblinear` tend to compare across the genes in the Vogelstein dataset at large, we looked at the difference in performance between optimizers for the best-performing models for each gene (Figure {@fig:optimizer_compare_mutations}C).
The distribution is centered around 0 and more or less symmetrical, suggesting that across the gene set, `liblinear` and SGD tend to perform comparably to one another.
We saw that for 58/84 genes, performance for the best-performing model was better using SGD than `liblinear`, and for the other 25 genes performance was better using `liblinear`.
In order to quantify whether the overfitting tendencies (or lack thereof) also hold across the gene set, we plotted the difference in performance between the best-performing model and the largest (least regularized) model; classifiers with a large difference in performance exhibit strong overfitting, and classifiers with a small difference in performance do not overfit (Figure {@fig:optimizer_compare_mutations}D).
For SGD, the least regularized models tend to perform comparably to the best-performing models, whereas for `liblinear` the distribution is wider suggesting that overfitting is more common.

![
**A.** Performance vs. inverse regularization parameter for KRAS mutation status prediction, using the `liblinear` coordinate descent optimizer. Dotted lines indicate top performance value of the opposite optimizer.
**B.** Performance vs. regularization parameter for KRAS mutation status prediction, using the SGD optimizer. "Holdout" dataset is used for SGD learning rate selection, "test" data is completely held out from model selection and used for evaluation.
**C.** Distribution of performance difference between best-performing model for `liblinear` and SGD optimizers, across all 84 genes in Vogelstein driver gene set. Positive numbers on the x-axis indicate better performance using `liblinear`, and negative numbers indicate better performance using SGD.
**D.** Distribution of performance difference between best-performing model and largest (least regularized) model, for `liblinear` and SGD, across all 84 genes. Smaller numbers on the y-axis indicate less overfitting, and larger numbers indicate more overfitting.
](images/optimizers/figure_1.png){#fig:optimizer_compare_mutations width="100%"}

#### SGD is sensitive to learning rate selection

The SGD results shown in Figure {@fig:optimizer_compare_mutations} select the best-performing learning rate using a grid search on the holdout dataset, independently for each regularization parameter.
We also compared against other learning rate scheduling approaches implemented in scikit-learn (see Methods for implementation details and grid search specifications).
For KRAS mutation prediction, we observed that the choice of initial learning rate and scheduling approach affects performance significantly, and other approaches to selecting the learning rate performed poorly relative to `liblinear` (black dotted lines in Figure {@fig:sgd_lr_schedulers}) and to the grid search.
We did not observe an improvement in performance over `liblinear` or the grid search for learning rate schedulers that decrease across epochs (Figure {@fig:sgd_lr_schedulers}A, C, and D), nor did we see comparable performance when we selected a single constant learning rate for all levels of regularization without the preceding grid search (Figure {@fig:sgd_lr_schedulers}B).
Notably, scikit-learn's default "optimal" learning rate schedule performed relatively poorly for this problem, suggesting that tuning the learning rate and selecting a well-performing scheduler is a critical component of applying SGD successfully for this problem (Figure {@fig:sgd_lr_schedulers}D).
We observed similar trends across all genes in the Vogelstein gene set, with other learning rate scheduling approaches performing poorly in aggregate relative to both `liblinear` and SGD with the learning rate grid search (Supplementary Figure {@fig:compare_all_lr}).

![
**A.** Performance vs. regularization parameter for KRAS mutation prediction, using SGD optimizer with adaptive learning rate scheduler. Dotted line indicates top performance value using `liblinear`, from Figure {@fig:optimizer_compare_mutations}A.
**B.** Performance vs. regularization parameter, using SGD optimizer with constant learning rate scheduler and a learning rate of 0.0005.
**C.** Performance vs. regularization parameter, using SGD optimizer with inverse scaling learning rate scheduler.
**D.** Performance vs. regularization parameter, using SGD optimizer with "optimal" learning rate scheduler.
](images/optimizers/figure_2.png){#fig:sgd_lr_schedulers width="100%"}

#### `liblinear` and SGD result in different models, with varying loss dynamics

We sought to determine whether there was a difference in the sparsity of the models resulting from the different optimization schemes.
In general across all genes, the best-performing SGD models mostly tend to have many nonzero coefficients, but with a distinct positive tail, sometimes having few nonzero coefficients.
By contrast, the `liblinear` models are generally sparser with fewer than 2500 nonzero coefficients, out of ~16100 total input features, and a much narrower tail (Figure {@fig:optimizer_coefs}A).
The sum of the coefficient magnitudes, however, tends to be smaller on average across all levels of regularization for SGD than for `liblinear` (Figure {@fig:optimizer_coefs}B).
This effect is less pronounced for the other learning rate schedules shown in Figure {@fig:sgd_lr_schedulers}, with the other options resulting in larger coefficient magnitudes (Supplementary Figure {@fig:coef_weights_lr}).
These results suggest that the models fit by `liblinear` and SGD navigate the tradeoff between bias and variance in slightly different ways: `liblinear` tends to produce sparser models (more zero coefficients) as regularization increases, but if the learning rate is properly tuned, SGD coefficients tend to have smaller overall magnitudes as regularization increases.


We also compared the components of the loss function across different levels of regularization between optimizers.
The LASSO logistic regression loss function can be broken down into a data-dependent component (the log-loss) and a parameter magnitude dependent component (the L1 penalty), which are added to get the total loss that is minimized by each optimizer; see Methods for additional details.
As regularization strength decreases for `liblinear`, the data loss collapses to near 0, and the L1 penalty dominates the overall loss (Figure {@fig:optimizer_coefs}C).
For SGD, on the other hand, the data loss decreases slightly as regularization strength decreases but remains relatively high (Figure {@fig:optimizer_coefs}D).
Other SGD learning rate schedules have similar loss curves to the `liblinear` results, although this does not result in improved classification performance (Supplementary Figure {@fig:loss_lr}).

![
**A.** Distribution across genes of the number of nonzero coefficients included in best-performing LASSO logistic regression models. Violin plot density estimations are clipped at the ends of the observed data range, and boxes show the median/IQR.
**B.** Distribution across genes of the sum of model coefficient weights for best-performing LASSO logistic regression models.
**C.** Decomposition of loss function for models fit using `liblinear` across regularization levels. 0 values on the y-axis are rounded up to machine epsilon; i.e. 2.22 x 10^-16^.
**D.** Decomposition of loss function for models fit using SGD across regularization levels. 0 values on the y-axis are rounded up to machine epsilon; i.e. 2.22 x 10^-16^.
](images/optimizers/figure_3.png){#fig:optimizer_coefs width="100%"}

#### Gene essentiality prediction in cancer cell lines yields similar results

As a complementary problem to mutation status prediction in human tumor samples, we binarized gene essentiality probabilities from the Cancer Dependency Map (DepMap) into the top 20% and bottom 80%, then used the same stratified cross-validation setup as before to predict whether or not held-out cell lines belonged to the top 20% using cell line gene expression data.
We evaluated this for 13 genes, with a variety of cancer functions: 5 oncogenes (_BRAF_, _EGFR_, _ERBB2_, _KRAS_, _PIK3CA_) where "oncogene addiction" has been observed, 5 genes (_PARP1_, _RAD52_, _POLQ_, _USP1_, _PRMT5_) with known synthetic lethal relationships, and 3 genes (_PTPN11_, _MDM4_, _CYFIP1_) labeled as having "differential dependencies" in a study of gene dependencies in DepMap [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.010]; additional detail in Methods.
For modeling _KRAS_ perturbation, we saw a similar trend in the cell line data as in the mutation prediction example, where `liblinear` overfits for high model complexities (Figure {@fig:essentiality_compare}A) and SGD is more resistant to overfitting (Figure {@fig:essentiality_compare}B).
Although performance across the other selected gene perturbations varied considerably (Supplementary Figure {@fig:essential_boxes}), we saw largely similar trends across other genes where models performed well, with the exception of _ERBB2_ which did tend to overfit for SGD as well as _liblinear_ (Supplementary Figure {@fig:essential_curves}).

Across all 13 genes, when we compared the best-performing models for `liblinear` and SGD, we did not see a systematic advantage for either optimizer, matching the results of the comparison across genes for mutation status prediction (Figure {@fig:essentiality_compare}C).
Similar to the pattern in Figure {@fig:optimizer_coefs}A, for gene essentiality prediction we also observed that `liblinear`-optimized models tended to be smaller on average than models optimized by SGD, with a relatively condensed distribution for `liblinear` on the order of hundreds to thousands of genes, but a "long tail" for SGD extending to models with tens of thousands of genes (Figure {@fig:essentiality_compare}D).
In general, these data suggest that the tradeoff between optimizers yields comparable results, and comparable recommendations, for a related classification problem on a distinct cancer transcriptomics data set.

![
**A.** Performance vs. inverse regularization parameter for KRAS gene essentiality prediction, using the `liblinear` coordinate descent optimizer.
**B.** Performance vs. regularization parameter for KRAS gene essentiality prediction, using the SGD optimizer. "Holdout" dataset is used for SGD learning rate selection, "test" data is completely held out from model selection and used for evaluation.
**C.** Distribution of performance difference between best-performing model for `liblinear` and SGD optimizers, across all 13 genes in gene essentiality prediction set. Positive numbers on the x-axis indicate better performance using `liblinear`, and negative numbers indicate better performance using SGD.
**D.** Distribution across 13 genes of the number of nonzero coefficients included in best-performing LASSO logistic regression models for essentiality prediction.
](images/optimizers/figure_4.png){#fig:essentiality_compare width="100%"}
