### Methods {.page_break_before}

#### Mutation data download and preprocessing

To generate binary mutated/non-mutated gene labels for our machine learning model, we used mutation calls for TCGA samples from MC3 [@doi:10.1016/j.cels.2018.03.002] and copy number threshold calls from GISTIC2.0 [@doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-4-r41].
MC3 mutation calls were downloaded from the Genomic Data Commons (GDC) of the National Cancer Institute, at <https://gdc.cancer.gov/about-data/publications/pancanatlas>.
Thresholded copy number calls are from an older version of the GDC data and are available here: <https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/TCGA_PanCanAtlas_Copy_Number_Data/6144122>.
We removed hypermutated samples, defined as two or more standard deviations above the mean non-silent somatic mutation count, from our dataset to reduce the number of false positives (i.e., non-driver mutations).
Any sample with either a non-silent somatic variant or a copy number variation (copy number gain in the target gene for oncogenes and copy number loss in the target gene for tumor suppressor genes) was included in the positive set; all remaining samples were considered negative for mutation in the target gene.

We followed a similar procedure to generate binary labels for cell lines from CCLE, using the data available on the DepMap download portal at <https://depmap.org/portal/download/all/>.
Mutation information was retrieved from the `OmicsSomaticMutations.csv` data file, and copy number information was retrieved from the `OmicsCNGene.csv` data file.
We thresholded the CNV log-ratios provided by CCLE into binary gain/loss calls using a lower threshold of log~2~(3/2) (i.e. cell lines with a log-ratio below this threshold were considered to have a full copy loss in the corresponding gene), and an upper threshold of log~2~(5/2) (i.e. cell lines with a log-ratio above this threshold were considered to have a full copy gain in the corresponding gene).
After applying the same hypermutation criteria that we used for TCGA, no cell lines in CCLE were identified as hypermutated.
After preprocessing, 1402 cell lines with mutation and copy number data remained.
We then combined non-silent point mutations and copy number gain/loss information into binary labels using the same criteria as for TCGA.

#### Gene expression data download and preprocessing

RNA sequencing data for TCGA was downloaded from GDC at the same link provided above for the Pan-Cancer Atlas.
We discarded non-protein-coding genes and genes that failed to map, and removed tumors that were measured from multiple sites.
After filtering to remove hypermutated samples and taking the intersection of samples with both mutation and gene expression data, 9074 TCGA samples remained.

RNA sequencing data for CCLE was downloaded from the DepMap download portal, linked above, in the `CCLE_expression.csv` data file.
After taking the intersection of CCLE cell lines with both mutation and gene expression data, 1402 cell lines remained.
For experiments making predictions across datasets (i.e., training models on TCGA and evaluating performance on CCLE, or vice-versa) we took the intersection of genes in both datasets, resulting in 16041 gene features.
For experiments where only TCGA data was used (i.e., evaluating models on held-out cancer types), we used all 16148 gene features present in TCGA after the filtering described above.

#### Cancer gene set construction

In order to study mutation status classification for a diverse set of cancer driver genes, we started with the set of 125 frequently altered genes from Vogelstein et al. [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1616440113] (all genes from Table S2A).
For each target gene, to ensure that the training dataset was reasonably balanced (i.e., that there would be enough mutated samples to train an effective classifier), we included only cancer types with at least 15 mutated samples and at least 5% mutated samples, which we refer to here as "valid" cancer types.
In some cases, this resulted in genes with no valid cancer types, which we dropped from the analysis.
Out of the 125 genes originally listed in the Vogelstein et al. cancer gene set, we retained 71 target genes for the TCGA to CCLE analysis, and 66 genes for the CCLE to TCGA analyses.
For these analyses, each gene needed at least one valid cancer type in TCGA and one valid cancer type in CCLE, to construct the train and test sets.
For the cancer type holdout analysis, we retained 56 target genes: in this case, each gene needed at least two valid cancer types in TCGA to be retained, one to train on and one to hold out.

#### Classifier setup and cross-validation design

We trained logistic regression classifiers to predict whether or not a given sample had a mutational event in a given target gene using gene expression features as explanatory variables.
Our model was trained on gene expression data (X) to predict somatic mutation presence or absence (y) in a target gene.
To control for varying mutation burden per sample and to adjust for potential cancer type-specific expression patterns, we included one-hot encoded cancer type and log~10~(sample mutation count) in the model as covariates.
Since gene expression datasets tend to have many dimensions and comparatively few samples, we used a LASSO penalty to perform feature selection [@doi:10.1111/j.2517-6161.1996.tb02080.x].
LASSO logistic regression has the ability to generate sparse models (some or most coefficients are 0), as well as having a single tunable hyperparameter which can be easily interpreted as an indicator of regularization strength/model simplicity.

LASSO ($L_{1}$-penalized) logistic regression finds the feature weights $\hat{w} \in \mathbb{R}^{p}$ solving the following optimization problem:

$$\hat{w} = \text{argmin}_{w} \ (C \cdot l(X, y; w)) + ||w||_1$$

where $i \in \{1, \dots, n\}$ denotes a sample in the dataset, $X_i \in \mathbb{R}^{p}$ denotes features (gene expression measurements) from the given sample, $y_i \in \{0, 1\}$ denotes the label (mutation presence/absence) for the given sample, and $l(\cdot)$ denotes the negative log-likelihood of the observed data given a particular choice of feature weights, i.e.

$$l(X, y; w) = -\sum_{i=1}^{n} y_i \log\left(\frac{1}{1 + e^{-w^{\top}X_i}}\right) + (1 - y_i) \log\left(1 - \frac{1}{1 + e^{-w^{\top}X_i}}\right)$$

Given weight values $\hat{w}$, it is straightforward to predict the probability of a positive label (mutation in the target gene) $P(y^{*} = 1 \mid X^{*}; \hat{w})$ for a test sample $X^{*}$:

$$P(y^{*} = 1 \mid X^{*}; \hat{w}) = \frac{1}{1 + e^{-\hat{w}^{\top}X^{*}}}$$

and the probability of no mutation in the target gene, $P(y^{*} = 0 \mid X^{*}; \hat{w})$, is given by (1 - the above quantity).

This optimization problem leaves one hyperparameter to select: $C$, which controls the inverse of the strength of the L1 penalty on the weight values (i.e. regularization strength scales with $\frac{1}{C}$).
Although the LASSO optimization problem does not have a closed form solution, the loss function is convex, and iterative optimization algorithms are commonly used for finding reasonable solutions.
For fixed values of $C$, we solved for $\hat{w}$ using `scikit-learn`'s `LogisticRegression` method [@url:https://jmlr.org/papers/v12/pedregosa11a.html], which uses the coordinate descent optimization method implemented in `liblinear` [@url:https://www.jmlr.org/papers/v9/fan08a.html].
We selected this implementation rather than the `SGDClassifier` stochastic gradient descent implementation because coordinate descent/`liblinear` tends to generate sparser models and does not depend on a learning rate parameter, although after hyperparameter tuning performance is generally comparable between the implementations [@doi:10.1101/2023.06.26.546586].

To assess model selection across contexts (datasets and cancer types), we trained models using a variety of LASSO parameters on 75% of the training dataset, holding out 25% of the training dataset as the "cross-validation" set and also evaluating across contexts as the "test" set.
We trained models using $C$ values evenly spaced on a dense logarithmic scale between (10^-3^, 10^3^), which was where we generally observed that performance varied the most, and a sparser logarithmic scale between (10^3^, 10^7^) in order to capture models with very little regularization that included all features.
In other words, the exact range we used is the output of the command: `numpy.concatenate(numpy.logspace(-3, 3, 43), numpy.logspace(3, 7, 21))`.

This range of regularization strength/sparsity levels was intended to give evenly distributed coverage across genes and cancer types that included "underfit" models (predicting only the mean or using very few features, poor performance on all datasets), "overfit" models (performing perfectly on training data but comparatively poorly on cross-validation and test data), and a wide variety of models in between that typically included the best fits to the cross-validation and test data.
To assess variability between train/CV splits, we used all 4 splits (25% holdout sets) x 2 random seeds for a total of 8 different training sets for each gene, using the same test set (i.e. all of the held-out context, either one cancer type or one dataset) in each case.

#### "Best model" vs. "smallest good model" analysis

For the "best" vs. "smallest good" model selection comparison, we started with 8 performance measurements (4 cross-validation folds x 2 random seeds) for each LASSO parameter.
We took the mean over these 8 measurements to get a single performance measurement for each model (LASSO parameter) on the holdout dataset, which has the same composition as the training set.
We used these per-parameter mean performance measurements to select the "best" model (LASSO parameter with the best mean performance on the holdout dataset), and the "smallest good" model (strongest LASSO parameter with mean performance within 1 standard error of the best mean performance value on the holdout dataset, as implemented in the `glmnet` R package's `lambda.1se` model selection method [@doi:10.18637/jss.v033.i01]).
For the distributions of differences shown in the Results, we took the difference in mean performance for the "best" and "smallest good" models for each gene, with positive differences indicating better performance for the "best" model and negative differences better performance for the "smallest good" model, for each gene.

#### Neural network setup and parameter selection

As a tradeoff between computational cost and ability to represent non-linear decision boundaries, inspired by the architecture of the intermediate-complexity model described in [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010984], we trained a three-layer fully connected neural network with ReLU nonlinearities [@https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3104322.3104425] to predict mutation status.
For the experiments described in the main paper, we varied the size of the first hidden layer in the range {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 50, 100, 500, 1000}.
We fixed the size of the second hidden layer to be half of the size of the first hidden layer, rounded up to the nearest integer, and the size of the third hidden layer was the number of classes, 2 in our case.
Our models were trained for 100 epochs of mini-batch stochastic gradient descent in PyTorch [@arxiv:1912.01703], using the Adam optimizer [@arxiv:1412.6980] and a fixed batch size of 50.
To select the remaining hyperparameters for each hidden layer size, we performed a random search over 10 combinations, with a single train/test split stratified by cancer type, using the following hyperparameter ranges: learning rate {0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 5e-4, 1e-4}, dropout proportion {0.1, 0.5, 0.75}, weight decay (L2 penalty) {0, 0.1, 1, 10, 100}.
We used the same train/cross-validation split strategy described above, generating 8 different performance measurements for each gene and hidden layer size, for the neural network experiments as well.

For the _EGFR_ gene, we also ran experiments where we varied the dropout proportion and the weight decay hyperparameter as the regularization axis, and selected the remaining hyperparameters (including the hidden layer size) using a random search.
In these cases, we used a fixed range for dropout of {0.0, 0.05, 0.125, 0.25, 0.375, 0.5, 0.625, 0.75, 0.875, 0.95}, and a fixed range for weight decay of {0.0, 0.001, 0.005, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0, 10.0}.
All neural network analyses were performed on a Ubuntu 18.04 machine with a NVIDIA RTX 2060 GPU.
