### Discussion

Using public cancer genomics and transcriptomics data from TCGA and CCLE, we studied generalization of mutation status classifiers for a wide variety of cancer driver genes.
We designed experiments to evaluate generalization across biological contexts by holding out cancer types in TCGA, and to evaluate generalization across datasets by training models on TCGA and evaluating them on CCLE, and vice-versa.
We found that, in general, smaller or more parsimonious models do not tend to generalize more effectively across cancer types or across datasets, and in the absence of prior knowledge about a prediction problem, simply choosing the model that performs the best on a holdout dataset is at least as effective for selecting models that generalize.

Our results were similar in both linear models (LASSO logistic regression) and non-linear deep neural networks when using hidden layer size as the regularization parameter of interest.
In our non-linear model experiments, we did not observe better generalization across datasets for fully connected neural networks with fewer hidden layer nodes, and our preliminary results indicated a similar trend for dropout and weight decay.
Compared to linear models, it is less clear how to define a "small" or "parsimonious" neural network model since there are many regularization techniques that one may use to control complexity.
Rather than simply removing nodes and keeping the network fully connected, another approach to parsimony could be to select an inductive bias to guide the size reduction of the network.
Existing examples include network structures guided by protein-protein interaction networks or function/pathway ontologies [@doi:10.1016/j.ccell.2020.09.014; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btx624; @doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02100-5; @doi:10.1016/j.patter.2022.100565].
It is possible that a smaller neural network with a structure that corresponds more appropriately to the prediction problem would achieve better generalization results, although choosing an apt network structure or data source can be a challenging aspect of such efforts.

For generalization from CCLE to TCGA, we observed that performance was generally worse on human tumor samples from TCGA than for held-out cell lines.
This could, at least in part, be a function of sample size: the number of cell lines in CCLE is approximately an order of magnitude smaller than the number of tumor samples in TCGA (~10,000 samples in TCGA vs. ~1,500 cell lines in CCLE, although the exact number of samples used to train and evaluate our classifiers varies by gene, see Methods for further detail).
There are also plausible biological and technical explanations for the difficulty of generalizing to human tumor samples.
This result could reflect the imperfect and limited nature of cancer cell lines as a model system for human tumors, which previous studies have pointed out [@doi:10.1093/jnci/djt007; @doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2971; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.06.017].
In addition, the CCLE data is collected and processed uniformly, as described in [@doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1186-3], while the TCGA data is processed by a uniform pipeline but collected from a wide variety of different cancer centers around the US [@doi:10.1038/ng.2764].

When we ranked cancer types in order of their generalization difficulty aggregated across genes, we noticed a slight tendency toward non-carcinoma cancer types (TGCT, SARC, SKCM) being difficult to generalize to.
It has been pointed out in other biological data types that holding out entire contexts or domains is necesssary for a full picture of generalization performance [@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02177-y; @doi:10.1038/s41576-021-00434-9], which our results corroborate.
This highlights a potential weakness of using TCGA's carcinoma-dominant pan-cancer data as a training set for a broad range of tasks, for instance in foundation models which are becoming feasible for some genomics applications [@arxiv:2306.15794; @doi:10.1101/2023.04.30.538439; @doi:10.1101/2023.05.29.542705].
One caveat of our analysis is that each cancer type is included in the training data or held out for a different subset of genes, so it is difficult to detangle gene-specific effects (some mutations have less distinguishable functional effects on gene expression than others) from cancer type-specific effects (some cancer types are less similar to each other than others) on prediction performance using our experimental design.

