## Chapter 5: future directions

**Contributions:**
I wrote this chapter for the purpose of this dissertation.

In this dissertation, we have identified complexities of the structure of large cancer -omics datasets that make building predictive models less straightforward than on more uniform datasets often considered in large-scale machine learning applications.
The results of Chapter 2 show that model selection depends heavily on which optimizer is used to fit the model, even when relying on a fairly simple linear modeling strategy, logistic regression.
In Chapter 3, we saw that although different -omics types in TCGA may have slightly variable information content related to cancer function, much of it is redundant in the sense that combining -omics layers generally does not result in a large performance boost.
Our experiments in Chapter 4 showed that generalization across cancer types and model systems can vary highly based on the held-out biological context, and that smaller or simpler models do not in general tend to be more robust across contexts than models that optimize cross-validation performance within a biological context.
Taken together, these results suggest several threads of future directions, both focused on development of methods and datasets, and focused on downstream biological/clinical applications.

### Multi-omics integration

In chapter 2, we saw the somewhat counterintuitive result that when gene expression and DNA methylation readouts were combined, they failed to predict mutations in 6 key pan-cancer driver genes better than expression or methylation data alone.
We also noted in the discussion section of chapter 2 that the multi-omics integration method we tried was a fairly simple one: we combined the feature sets of each -omics type and fit a model directly to this larger dataset, sometimes referred to as "early" integration.
A wide variety of more complex methods for integration of multi-omics and other data types exist and have been applied successfully to multi-omics integration problems, reviewed in detail in [@doi:10.1016/j.inffus.2018.09.012; @doi:10.1016/j.csbj.2021.06.030] and others.

Multi-omics integration is a particularly salient problem in single-cell analysis, where data are generally sparse and often unpaired, or measured on different cells (reviewed in [@doi:10.1038/s41581-021-00463-x; @doi:10.1016/j.csbj.2021.04.060; @doi:10.1016/j.tig.2021.08.012] and elsewhere).
However, many existing methods are not designed to incorporate axes of variation other than those typically included in single-cell studies, such as mutation status or cancer type, although some incorporate supervision or prior knowledge (e.g. [@arxiv:2102.03014; @arxiv:2307.10093; @doi:10.1038/s42256-022-00545-w]).
More specific characterization of the conditions under which integrating multiple -omics types provides additional information relative to some labeling, as well as identifying conditions when -omics types are functionally redundant, would have important implications for study design in both bulk and single-cell contexts.

### Cancer model systems and data

We showed in chapter 4 that when mutation prediction models are trained on cell line data, performance on tumor samples is generally worse than performance on held out cell lines.
We also saw that the converse is not true: on balance, models trained on tumor samples tend to generalize relatively well to cell lines.
This is likely at least in part due to biological differences between cancer cell lines and the tumors they aim to model.
Other studies have also observed that cell line gene expression is less representative of tumor samples than PDX mouse models [@doi:10.1101/2023.04.11.536431] and genetically engineered mouse models [@doi:10.1186/s13073-021-00888-w], although this can vary by cancer type.
In Chapter 2, we noted the general reliance of drug response prediction efforts on public cell line datasets such as CCLE and GDSC, most likely due to the size (both in terms of sample size and number of -omics data types profiled) and accessibility of the datasets.
Together with our results, this underscores the need for larger and more representative compendia of model system data that may be biologically closer to human tumors, including mouse models, tumoroids, and others.

Another desired generalization property that we did not explore in the work in this dissertation is generalization between adult and pediatric cancers.
Particularly with the increasing availability of public pediatric cancer datasets including the Therapeutically Applicable Research to Generate Effective Treatments (TARGET) project [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa0808253], the Open Pediatric Brain Tumor Atlas [@doi:10.1016/j.xgen.2023.100340], and Pediatric DepMap [@doi:10.1038/s41588-021-00819-w], developing models that are either specific to pediatric cancer or that integrate both adult and pediatric cancer is starting to become a possibility.
Previous work has shown that a machine learning classifier to predict _TP53_ inactivation trained on data from TCGA generalized effectively to pediatric PDX tumors, but a similarly applied Ras activation classifier failed to generalize effectively [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2019.09.071].
In the future, it would be useful to more broadly characterize cases where classifiers generalize effectively and fail to generalize, and to develop methods to incorporate abundant adult tumor data into models that can make inferences about more limited pediatric samples.

### Validation and clinical application of mutation status classifiers

Our "leave-one-cancer-type-out" experiments described in chapter 4 suggest that cancer types in TCGA can vary highly in how easy or hard they are to generalize to, or how similar or different they are from the rest of the dataset.
This emphasizes the need for carefully choosing cross-validation holdout sets, since cross-validation sets that are stratified by cancer type, which is more typical for TCGA or CCLE analyses, may give an overly optimistic view of performance as compared to evaluation on an entirely held out cancer type.
A similar experimental structure evaluating drug response prediction in held-out tissues was also described in [@doi:10.1038/s43018-020-00169-2], as well as more generally in the context of genomic prediction problems where generalization to new cell types may be desirable [@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02177-y].

Differentiating similar from divergent behavior of driver mutations across tissues/cancer types could have direct applications in basket clinical trial design, where the basic idea is that patients are included in the trial across multiple cancer types based on the presence or absence of a targetable mutation or molecular alteration.
A previous study explored the idea of selecting cancer types in a more principled way based on proteomics data, identifying several mutations with convergent effects across cancers including _ERBB2_ amplification and _KRAS_/_NRAS_ mutation [@doi:10.1186/s13073-018-0591-9],
The experimental setup we described in chapters 3 and 4 could be used in a complementary manner to integrate more data types and provide improved statistical power across a variety of genes and cancer types.

Moreover, the success or failure of a mutation status classifier in identifying samples that may be susceptible to a targeted therapy is likely to be highly dependent on the definition of "mutated" that is settled on to train the classifier.
In the work described in this dissertation, we use a somewhat coarse-grained definition, where a sample "has a mutation" in a gene if there is either any non-silent point mutation in that gene, or a copy number variation in the correct direction for the gene's function in cancer (gain for oncogenes or loss for tumor suppressors).
However, there are biological reasons to believe that both more flexibility in positive class definition (e.g. epigenetic modifications to genes, such as silencing via DNA methylation, or pathway cross-talk wherein mutations in different genes in the same signaling pathway could have the same functional effect) and/or more stringency (e.g. not all non-silent mutations in the same gene are necessarily functional or have a convergent function, as explored in [@doi:10.1186/s12859-021-04147-y]) could lead to more performant and robust classifiers in certain cases.

The iterative process implemented in the LURE algorithm [@doi:10.1142/9789811215636_0031] is one approach to identifying different molecular alterations that have convergent functions in cancer, but the analysis in the study describing LURE is limited to individual cancer types and known driver mutations.
A more flexible algorithm could simultaneously identify patients whose tumors have high pan-cancer functional similarity to a known driver alteration, and cancer types or even whole datasets/patient cohorts to include in model training in which this functional similarity is most pronounced, as a tool for rational design of basket clinical trials.
Validation of such an algorithm to the standards of clinical application would be a challenge, and would likely depend at least initially on retrospective information about driver events in certain genes, in contrast to its desired prospective use in selecting clinical trial cohorts.

### Conclusion
